# PHPClassWinter2015


Class:              Web Development Using PHP and MySQL

Meetings:

SE 266.55 – Evening Class

Wednesday, 5:45 P.M. to 10:40 P.M. Room N205 - Jan 7, 2015 - Mar 18, 2015
Friday, 5:45 P.M. to 10:15 P.M. Room N205 - Feb 27, 2015 (Week 7)
Break Week - Feb 18, 2015 (No Class)

Course Description:

2 Class Hours, 4 Lab Hours, 4 Credit Hours
Students will learn the use of server-side scripting to create dynamic, database 
driven sites using PHP and MySQL. Emphasis is placed on applications that are 
user-friendly and secure.

Prerequisites:

SE 122, SE 240, and SE 246

Text:

Murach’s PHP and Mysql. Joel Murach and Ray Harris. 2010. Mike Murach & 
Associates, Inc. 978-1-890774-56-1.


Required Materials:

Portable USB 2.0 Storage Device with at least 20 GB of space available for this 
course.

Most newer flash drives will easily provide the required capacity, however the 
frequent writing to the flash drive by the portable server will degrade 
performance and will prematurely cause the flash device to fail. A portable hard 
drive would be a better choice and is highly recommended.

It is the responsibility of each student to obtain, maintain, protect and secure 
that student’s portable USB storage device. The USB drive should be used to back 
up the files used in the laboratory exercises.  Use of your Z: drive space is 
possible as a backup. Loss of or damage to files, for any reason, will not be an 
acceptable excuse for failure to complete required laboratory exercises. 
Students are encouraged to periodically backup files. As a rule, select your 
backup interval to match the amount of work you’re willing to lose. Always test 
backups to be sure you can retrieve data from them.

A github.com account.  Please use the first letter of your first name and your 
last name for the account if possible. Gabriel Forti would be gforti.  
All assignments must be posted on your github.com account before you submit the 
url to your account.

Course Outcomes:

By the end of the quarter the student will be able to do the following:

Create dynamic web pages using PHP. This will be evidenced by completion of lab 
and homework assignments, quizzes, and exams.
Use PHP to process information submitted via HTML forms. The student will 
provide evidence of acquisition of this skill using laboratory exercises, and 
out of class exercises in developing user interfaces for their projects as well 
as in quiz and exam questions.
Connect PHP scripts to a MySQL database for long-term data storage and retrieval 
as evidenced by completion of lab and homework assignments, quizzes, and exams.
Use a variety of PHP features to solve programming problems typically 
ncountered in web development. This will be evidenced by completion of lab and 
homework assignments, quizzes, and exams.
Describe how security limitations can impact program development as evidenced by 
completion of lab and homework assignments, quizzes, and exams.
Break down complex programs using MVC for more productive development. The 
student will provide evidence of acquisition of this skill using laboratory 
exercises, and out of class exercises in developing user interfaces for their 
projects as well as in quiz and exam questions.

Assessments of Outcomes:

A comprehensive final examination will be used to assess the student’s ability to 
list, describe compare, recognize and identify appropriate concepts, tools and 
procedures described in the course objectives.  Scores of 60% or higher for all 
exams are expected to be achieved.

Homework review questions will be used to assess the student’s ability to list, 
describe compare, recognize and identify appropriate concepts, tools and 
procedures described in the course objectives. Scores of 60% or higher for all 
assignments are expected to be achieved.

Laboratory exercises will be used to reinforce, demonstrate and practice 
concepts and procedures described in the course objectives. A minimum of 90% of 
all assigned lab activities are expected to be completed to the satisfaction of 
the instructor. Scores of 60% or higher for all laboratory exercises are 
expected to be achieved.

Project assignments will be used to assess the student’s ability to 
independently design and implement solutions to programming challenges.

Instructional Strategies / Methodology:

This course utilizes a variety of instructional strategies.  Theoretical content 
is provided through lectures, and reading assignments.  Exercises are used to 
complement the theory and encourage the development of skills in applying the 
course content.  Homework assignments are assigned to help the student merge the 
facts and concepts presented by the various content sources into a comprehensive 
understanding of the material.  Exams are presented throughout the course to 
help the student recognize the student’s strengths and weaknesses in each topic 
area.

Different learning styles are accommodated by offering lectures, readings, 
hands-on activities, and assessments.

BUT: after the first couple of weeks, the lab and homework projects will be 
cumulative, each will build on the previous work to create a more complex 
application by the end of the quarter. It will be very difficult for you to 
catch up if you miss more than one week because your existing code will be much 
farther behind. You are encouraged to share knowledge and help your classmates 
but you must not share files. 

Evaluation and Grading Criteria:

The final grade will be based on the instructor’s evaluation of how well the 
student has mastered the course objectives.  The evaluation will be based 
primarily on a composite of the student’s performance on quizzes, homework, labs, 
and the final exam. Weighting of the major criteria is as follows:

Assignments:              40%

Exercises:                30%

Final Examination:        20%

Discussion Forum:         10%

---------------------------------  
Total:                    100%

 

Course Policies:

Course policies are set by the instructor and will vary from one instructor to 
another and from one course to another.  Students are encouraged to ask the 
instructor for clarification of any policy that is not clearly stated.

Notebook Computers, Cell Phones, Pagers and other Electronic Devices

Refer to the student handbook for details. Essentially this means that no 
electronic devices of any kind may be used in the classroom at any time without 
the expressed consent of the instructor.

Inappropriate Computer Use:

Software such as packet sniffers, key loggers, port scanners or any software 
that may compromise computer or network security may not be used in the 
classroom at any time without the knowledge and expressed consent of the 
instructor.  Any violation of this policy will be reported to the Provost’s 
office for possible disciplinary action.

Assignments and Exercises:

Assignments and exercises must be completed in a timely fashion, and completion 
demonstrated to the instructor.  Sufficient time is provided during class 
periods for timely completion of exercises.  Students who have excessive 
absences may jeopardize their ability to complete all of the assigned exercises 
and assignments. Exercises are explained step-by-step by the textbook author. 
Assignments are modifications that the author suggests, but which rely on your 
understanding of the material to be able to complete. Items turned in late are 
assessed a 5% penalty each week they are overdue. 
DO NOT SUBMIT WORK VIA EMAIL - use Canvas!

Review Questions:

The course covers a number of general topic areas, and each topic is accompanied 
by a set of review questions and/or a quiz. Homework review questions are more 
open-ended and are answered on your own time; quizzes tend to be more factual 
and might be done in class. Students are required to submit their responses for 
each section via the Canvas Assignment system before the respective due data for 
the questions. Students who show up after an in-class quiz has started may not 
be permitted to take the quiz. As with any late work, review questions and/or 
quizzes submitted after the due date may be penalized at the discretion of the 
instructor. 

Final Exam:

The final exam is cumulative, covering all material presented during the course. 
It will be given during Week 10 of the term.  The final examination may include 
multiple choice questions, essay questions and hands-on activities.  Details 
about the final examination will be presented in class and on the Canvas site. 
The final exam is 3/18 and no early or late finals will be permitted.

Attendance and Class Participation:

Regular attendance is important to successful completion of the course.  Factual 
material and practical insights will be presented in class in addition to those 
covered in the required reading assignments.  A significant portion of this 
class is group lab work which must be done in class.  Absence from class 
prevents the student from contributing to the group effort and in benefiting 
from the contributions of other students.  Students missing classes, and the 
work associated with those classes, may jeopardize their ability to pass the 
course.

Class participation means more than simply being present in class.  Class 
participation means coming to class prepared by having read and studied the 
assigned readings and having completed assigned homework.  Participation also 
means contributing to class discussions and answering questions that arise 
during the discussion of required material. It cannot be overemphasized how much 
doing the reading ahead of time will contribute to a good class flow and ability 
to comprehend the material!

Arriving at class on time is also important.  Late arrivals not only risk 
missing important information, but can cause distraction to the class.  Being 
punctual is even more important in the working world, and should be practiced 
conscientiously in school.

COLLEGE POLICIES:

Academic Honesty Policy

Any project, paper, or examination is expected to be the student's own work, in 
the student's own words. Academic dishonesty (including but not limited to 
copying another student's work or allowing one's own work to be copied; using 
notes or books during an examination without the instructor's advance 
permission; presenting information or images copied from a book, journal, or 
online source as one's own) will not be tolerated. See the web site for the full 
policy.

The design of this course as outlined in the syllabus requires you to do work 
outside of class to be successful.

Other Policies:

Each student is responsible for accessing the 
http://wcb.neit.edu/shandbook/syllabuspolicies.pdf (Links to an external site.) 
web site and becoming familiar with all academic policies.

Feedback:

Students are encouraged to meet with the instructor outside of class time to 
discuss the student’s progress in the course and any concerns the student may 
have regarding the content, pacing and evaluation of the material presented

Students are encouraged to send questions or comments via email, if a personal 
meeting is not convenient. When sending email to the instructor, be sure to use 
your NEIT email account

Most email is answered within 24 hours (except for holidays and school breaks). 
If you do not receive a response from the instructor in a timely fashion, assume 
that the message was not received and resend your message.

Assignment And Lab Descriptions:

Forum: All students are required to participate in the discussion forum on 
Canvas. In it, the students will discuss their week’s work.

Exercise 1: In exercise the student will test supplied applications and tools.

Exercise 2-1: Students will start with an html form and then add statements to 
performs some calculations and output the results.

Exercise 2-2: This exercise has the student add some enhancements to a 
pre-existing php application.

Exercise 3-1: Students gain experience using phpmyadmin.

Exercise 4-1: Students expand the Product Manager Application to allow for 
category deletion and adding.

Exercise 5-1: Students apply their knowledge about MVC to enhance the Guitar 
Shop Application.

Exercise 7-1: Students use php to make use of form data from non-text controls.

Exercises 9-1: Students will work with string a number conversions and formats.

Exercise 11-1: Students modify the Task List Manager Application so that it will 
properly use arrays.
 

Assignment 1: Students will execute a simple Hello World application.

Assignment 2-1, 2-2: Students will add on to their code from Exercises 2-1 and 
2-2 as a way of re-enforcing their learning about control statements.

Assignment 3: Students will create a simple crud application accessing a 
database.

Assignment 4 (1-5): Students will create a signup/login/admin page using 
sessions, functions/classes, and accessing a database

 

Rigor

Students learning is achieved and assessed with the lab exercise results as well 
as the homework assignments. Students will have to complete the out of class 
assignments in order to be able to successfully compare different platforms. 
Exams are structured to assess learning from all of the course elements.
